# Introduction to the Linux Kernel

Difference between user space and kernel space

Applications running on the system communicate with the kernel via a [[syscall]]

- User applications in libraries like the C library eventually rely on the
  system call interface to instruct the kernel to carry out applications on the
  application's behalf
- Applications execute a system call and the kernel operates on behalf of the
  application in kernel-space.
  - The application is executing a system call in [[kernel space]]
  - The kernel is operating in [[process context]]

There are three contexts that cover all kernel operation at any time.

- In [[user space]] executing user code in process
- In [[kernel space]] in [[process context]], executing on behalf of a specific
  process
- In [[kernel space]] in [[interrupt context]], not associated with a process,
  handling an interrupt

These are inclusive and cover everything. Interesting, even when idle, the
kernel is in user space, executing the idle process in process context.

Questions:

- How are kernel space and user space related to processor protection rings?

There are 4 protection rings for x86 - Linux only uses two, ring 0 (kernel mode)
and ring 3 (user mode). There is a mechanism for the kernel to switch from one
protection ring when operating in user space and then switching to ring 0 again
to continue executing in kernel space. This is enforced by the CPU itself -
there is a hardware guarantee that the x86 architecture provides. The kernel's
responsibility is to set up certain tables correctly at boot and then the CPU
enforces the separation. It's the processor's construction with protection rings
that enables Linux to enforce separation into user and kernel space operations.

- What does it mean for the kernel to be preemptive?

To understand this properly, it's important to thoroughly understand what the
kernel is actually doing. First, the kernel isn't a giant application that is
constantly running - its more accurately thought of as a series of library
functions that execute when invoked by a syscall, interrupt, or kernel thread.
These are executed only in kernel space (protection ring 0). User applications
can operate in and out of kernel space.

Preemption typically because of a timer that has expired and triggers a hardware
interrupt. At that point, the scheduler decides whether or not to allow a
process to be halted and another process to take its place. Processes running
in user mode can be preempted by the scheduler. Prior to 2.6, processes running
in kernel space (whether they were kernel processes or user processes operating
in kernel mode) could not be preempted by the scheduler. Processes were
basically guaranteed that once they entered kernel mode, they could monopolize
the processor until it returned to user space. The 2.6 kernel removed that
guarantee and processes operating in kernel mode could be interrupted to
schedule higher-priority ones, unless they were holding a lock.

- How does the kernel provide object-oriented device models? It doesn't have
  classes, so how is an OOP model provided?

Classes in OOP are fundamentally containers that hold data and a set of
functions for working with those data. Object-oriented features are supported
in the kernel by defining sequences of embedded structs, with functions or
function pointers (i.e., methods) that operate on those types.
